---
title: Summary, August 14, 2020
date: 2020-08-14
authors:
  - Dan F-M
draft: false
---

I started this week's meeting by asking for feedback about our plans for the
[online.tess.science](https://online.tess.science) event that I am co-organizing
in September. This event is the 2020 version (hopefully this is just a year, and
not an indication that it will go up in flames) of the
[tess.science](https://tess.science) series of workshops where astronomers get
together to collaborate on new projects related to NASA's TESS mission. The
previous 3 events have all been organized in-person and, since this event will
be fully remote and international, there are various challenges (and
opportunities) that we haven't experienced before. One difference between this
event and many other online conferences is that there will be no formal
presentations. Instead, participants are encouraged to start new collaborations
and try to learn something new. The group had a lot of good questions and
feedback about our current plans. In particular, there was a good discussion
about how important it will be to manage expectations, especially when people
have experience with in-person events where they can walk across the room and
ask questions of any other participant in real time. There were also some
suggestions about how to encourage interactions between participants even if
they are not directly collaborating. We'll see how well we can execute on these
plans!

Next, John Forbes discussed a data management/coding challenge that he's
currently facing. He has a large simulation where the properties of a set of
about a million "particles" are saved to disk at a series of "times". The output
of this simulation can be thought of as a large multidimensional array where the
first dimension is time, the second dimension is particle number, and the third
indexes the various properties that are being tracked. This full dataset is too
large to be loaded into memory and John wants to run an analysis on a subset of
the most interesting particles at all times. However, since the data are stored
as snapshots, loading the properties of a particular particle at all times is a
computationally expensive task. Besides a few snarky comments about
serialization formats, the group had several suggestions for how to improve this
performance of this operation. The main observation was that the data are
essentially stored in row-major order, while the operations would be more
efficient on column-major ordered data. The group suggested several tools that
could help here, including [dask](https://dask.org/),
[Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/), and [Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/).
